Hi there.
This is the model guru.
And welcome back to the demos that we have done so far and the section we are now to some extent already
familiar with methods.
Let's now take a look at methods in a more formal way.
We know that an object has state and behavior and behavior is defined by methods.
And we know that state is defined by variables.
Methods represent some logic which can be used any number of times.
A software business logic or algorithms are coded into methods, and nothing worthwhile can be achieved
without methods.
Methods typically receive data as input.
Then they do some processing and finally can generate some output.
Let's look at a simple depiction of method invocation.
We will have a method which needs to be invoked.
And we will also have a caller who invokes the method caller is just another piece of code.
And if method needs some input data, then the caller has to pass the input data.
The method then performs its actions and can return some data back to the colour colour then further
uses the data returned.
And here is the syntax for a method.
It has a method name, which is followed by an optional list of something called parameters which indicate
the input data for the method.
A method can have one or more parameters, and if there are no parameters, then it means that the method
does not take any input and a parameter is simply a variable and hence has a data type and a variable
name.
Since a parameter is a variable, it can be either a primitive or an object reference.
And as we mentioned earlier, method will perform some action and may return a value which is the output
of the method.
And value is returned using the return statement.
And here the keyword return in the return statement is a reserved keyword in Java.
Now like method parameters, the value retained can also be either a parameter or an object reference,
and it can also be a variable or a literal to.
And the type of the value returned which we call as methods return type is indicated in the method declaration
right before the method name.
Stating the return type in the declaration is mandatory and it also has to appear right before the method
name.
Otherwise we get a compilation error so you cannot have anything in between the methods return type
under the methods name.
In Java.
The method name and the method parameter list together are referred to as method signature.
So method return type is not part of the signature.
Sometimes developers incorrectly assume that the methods return type is also part of the signature.
So just stick this in your mind.
Method signature includes only method name and parameter list and not the methods return type.
Now, once the method is defined, it needs to be invoked.
Methods logic will never be executed if it is not invoked.
So you would have some code invoking the method.
And let's look at the syntax on the invocation side.
The syntax involves the method name followed by any input data that needs to be passed to the method.
The input data in the parentheses is referred to as method arguments or simply arguments.
The arguments passed must have a 1 to 1 match with the method parameters.
That is, they must be of compatible type and in the same order, and the number of arguments must match
the number of method parameters.
So for example, if the first parameter in the method declaration is an int and second is a boolean,
then on the invocation end for the first argument, the caller should pass an int or a smaller compatible
type like byte or a shot, and a boolean should be passed as the second argument.
Otherwise we get a compilation error.
Also, if the method does not take any input, then we just have an empty parenthesis on the invocation
side.
Now here I want to emphasize a bit on terminology.
You can see that when we are talking about method definition, we would refer to the method input variables
as parameters.
Sometimes they are also referred to as formal parameters.
However, when we are referring to method invocation, we would call them as arguments and some refer
to it as actual parameters.
So we have formal parameters and actual parameters.
And in this course, let's try to stick with the terms, parameters and arguments.
Often we tend to intermix these terms, but strictly speaking, parameter is the right term when we
are talking about method definition while argument is the right term, when we are talking about method
invocation.
Finally, if the method is returning a value, the value is typically assigned to some variable on the
invocation end, and the caller further uses it in some way.
However, nothing stops the caller from ignoring the return value, although that is very uncommon.
Also, just the way arguments and parameters have to match the return type and the method declaration
and the type of the variable on the caller's end must also match.
That is, there must be of compatible types.
Otherwise we get a compilation error.
So if it is the method's return type, then the variable on the caller's end must be off type end or
a smaller data type.
Similarly, the value returned by the method and the return type in the method declaration should also
be compatible.
Next, let's look at few more details on the methods return type.
There is a special type of return type called void.
If the method has void as written type, then it implies that the method does not return anything and
hence there need not be any written statement.
You may want to recall that all of the methods which we wrote in the basic demo class had void as written
type, and so we did not have any written statements.
However, you can still optionally have written keyword followed by semicolon as the methods last statement.
So it is just a way of saying that the method is not returning anything.
But typically developers do not include such a written statement.
And here is an example with void return type.
So return type is mandatory in the method declaration and it can be a primitive type or an array or
a class name or something called interface, which we will see later a few sections down the line or
it can be void to.
Finally, a method must return a value if return type is something other than void.
Otherwise we get a compiler error.
Now let's go ahead and test everything we just discussed.
Okay.
Here we are in the Basics Demo class.
So for this demo, let's go ahead and write a simple method called Sum, which, as the name suggests,
computes the sum of two numbers.
So it takes two parameters double, and it computes the sum.
So let's go ahead and write that.
So the return type of the method would be double and the method name is some and it takes two parameters.
The first one is double.
And parameter name is X.
Second one is double.
And it would return a value.
We would just say X plus Y.
Or we could also have had a statement here, like, for example, double Z is equal to X plus Y, and
we could have written Z, but we can also have this kind of an expression, or we can also return literals
also.
But here we want to compute the sum of X and Y.
So this is what we have.
But first thing I want to show is this double.
I mentioned that it has to be before it has to come before the method name.
So if we have it here, so we have the static keyword in between double and sum, then we would get
a compilation error.
You see here, it says invalid method, declaration written type required.
So it says that we need a return type.
So it's got to be before the method name.
This is how it should be now.
So that's the method definition.
Now let's go ahead and invoke it.
So let's define the variable as double.
Let's call it DX and let's invoke the method sum and let's pass 3.02.0, and let's print the value.
So the value that some returns will be assigned to this variable DX and that gets printed.
So let me run it.
As you can see, it is printing the value file.
So we said that.
So these are the arguments and we said that the arguments should have 1 to 1 match with this.
So we have two arguments and two doubles here.
So the type is also matching.
The order should match and the number of arguments should also match here with the parameters.
There should be a 1 to 1 correspondence.
Now we also said that type should be compatible, which means that we can either pass three point or
a double value, a double letter, or we can also pass a smaller data type so we can pass a float also,
as float is smaller than double.
So let's go ahead and compile recompile and rerun it.
So we see the value file so we can also do that.
Next, let's change this to float here.
So both the types we're making it as float.
So let's recompile this.
You clear the screen?
So in this case, the second argument is giving an issue because there is an incompatible type here,
because the second argument that we are passing is double, but the second parameter is flawed.
So double we is a larger data type.
So we have to pass either a float here flawed later, or we can also apply a cast.
So we can say float.
So we can also do this.
So we can put a we can insert a cast here.
So now both of them are floats and we have the match matching parameters.
So that's good.
Now here.
X plus y would be a float, but the return type is double.
So we say that the return value must be compatible with this.
And so we can see that here we are returning a float, but then here we have double.
So it's compatible and so there are no issues with that.
Now let's say if this is flawed, so let's change this to float and let's make this.
Double.
This double.
So we are summing up two doubles, but the return type is flawed and so that should give a compilation
error.
Because there is incompatibility here, it's got to be compatible.
So we have to apply a cast now here when we apply the cast.
So if we just do this, the cast would be applied to only X but not white.
So what we have to do is we can put a parentheses here.
Now the cast is applied to to x plus Y, so x plus Y would be double.
Then a cast is applied.
And then we are good.
Okay.
So it compiles fine and it still prints the value file.
So that's what we have.
And here the type is flawed.
And on this end, the type is double, which is totally fine because float is a smaller type and can
be assigned to a double.
So there is going to be an implicit cast.
So that's that.
Now let's change it back to the original form, which says X plus Y.
This is X plus five.
This is.
Double.
Now, let's just make this float.
So the return type is double and on the colors and the variable is flood.
So a double is being assigned to flood and obviously it should give us a compilation error.
So incompatible type.
So what should we do?
So we should just insert a cast here.
Then it returns.
Five.
So that's that.
So we can apply a cast in this way.
So we can apply a cast here, we can apply a cast here, or we can even apply a cast in the written
statement itself.
So next.
Let's.
Right.
Define a method called average.
C.
A.
V.
G.
Okay.
So average we have to compute for an average of these two numbers.
So what we can do is let's define a variable called sum here.
So let's say double and say some equals two.
Let's make use of this method sum and pass x.
So if average is invoked with some input, so x and y will have some values.
So we will just pass those values to sum.
So from the average method, we are invoking the sum.
So we are reusing the functionality of this.
And here we need to compute the sum.
So let's just say sum divided by two.
And here.
This is day to.
So let me just recompile.
As you can see, initially we are printing five because we were invoking some.
And then when we invoke average, it prints 2.5.
So that's what it is.
So from the main method, we are invoking the average method and from average we are invoking the sum.
So one method is accessing another method and that another method is accessing another method.
So what we are seeing here is the benefit of divide and conquer.
So instead of having X plus Y here, we have a separate method just for doing that and we are reusing
that.
So that's software reusability in action.
So this some method can now be used not just by average, but some other code.
Also, for instance, here we are using some and there can be some other program which can reuse that
particular sum and that code can be in an entirely different project to.
So you get the benefit of reusability.
Now this particular method is very small, very small method.
But let's say if the method is really huge, if if the logic here is huge, and if we are not making
use of methods, then we would probably end up use writing that entire logic here in this method.
And wherever we need that logic, we would be writing that logic.
So the benefit is by having all of that logic in one method, the benefit that we get is we are avoiding
duplication.
Had that logic been is duplicated in this method and also in all other methods, and if we have to make
a small change, then we have to make that change in all of those places.
But by having all of that logic in one single method, then if the change has to be made, then it would
be made only in that particular method.
And we can invoke that method from all of the different places.
So that's the benefit of having methods.
So you have your avoiding duplication, and then you also get the benefit of reusability.
And the court also looks very clean.
So that's the benefit that you get of defining logic in in methods.
Now for the void keyword.
We already know this, so we have written some methods in our demos.
So all of these have void, so they do not return anything.
So we don't have any written statements like we have in this case.
Now, the final thing I want to demonstrate is about passing arrays.
So let's say we have a method called search.
So let's just say it returns boolean.
And let's call it a search and let's define an entry and let's call it list.
And let's say we want to search for an element in the list, and the element is this key.
So that's just the method definition.
And let's just return true here.
It doesn't matter.
So what I want to demonstrate is how can we invoke search now here?
So such.
List to.
And let me define list here.
And.
So this is the list and we want to pass it.
And this compiles perfectly fine.
Okay.
Now, let's say if we want to pass it here, if you want to do this, then it's not going to work.
You see, it gives us some compilation errors.
That's because this kind of simplest notation which we have for creating a arrays, is valid only in
declaration statements, but we cannot use it when invoking a particular method.
So when we are invoking a particular method, either we have to pass a variable or we have to use the
second way of declaring variables.
If you recall, we had this so you can also do this and pass an array.
So array is created here and is passed to the method.
So the only thing is we cannot do this notation here.
This way of declaring an area is valid only in the declaration statements.
So it will it will not work if we want to pass here.
So that's it.
And let me just compile this.
Here it is.
So it compiles fine.
So that's it.
And so this notation works only in declaration statements, and it will not work in method invocations,
or it will also not work here.
You can also you cannot also do this even in re assignments.
It's not going to work.
As you can see, it gives us some compilation errors so it can be possible only within a declaration.
Statements.
Statements such as this one.
So that's about it.
So that's an introduction to methods.
Thank you.
And see you in the next lecture.